The War of the Roses constituted the logical conclusion of the Hundred YearsWar. As
such it remains in memory as something romantic, a tale of medieval chivalry and barbarity,
on the border between myth and reality. The mind conjures up images of faceless armored
cavalry and slender infantries of soldiers with long-bows, all made striking to the eye by
colorful standards and gaudy dresses with the commanders decked out as jewels. What
was the difference between a battle and a joust? All for show, but the former with blood
and disembowelment as a consequence.
Two Royal dynasties intertwined by marriages and recklessly inbred. The Lancaster
branch, headed by the ineffectual son Henry VI of the hero Henry V of Agincourt, as a
child crowned the King of France and with a French Queen Margarete Anjou, was on the
decline, the loss of French possessions (save the Calais and the Channel Islands) being
attributed to their lucklustre stewardship. The head of the York branch, the Duke of
York, was to see to the deposition of the Lancaster king, however, he was prematurely
killed, so this task was accomplished by his son - Edward IV, who, for but one year of
being ousted, while Henry VI was momentarily reinstituted, served as the King for twenty
years. He died, his issue was confiscated and destroyed (the legend of the two princes
in the Tower) by his younger brother, who would seize the crown as Richard III, and
whose ill gotten reign would only last for two years before he was killed at the battle of
Bosworth by the emerging Henry VII whose step-father tipped the balance by eventually
actively joining the inferior forces of his step-son. The battle of Bosworth marks the end
of the civil strife, but only in the eyes of posterity, at the time, ultimate success was not
assured but further challenges had to be fought. With the ascendancy of Henry VII, whose
legitimacy ultimately stemmed from that pivotal John of Gaunt third son of Edward III,
the Platagenet dynasty came to an end, to be replaced by the Tudor for the next hundred
odd years. Richard III was the last English king to die in battle, and one of the very last
to take part in one.
To understand the civil war one needs to understand the basis and legitimacy of
power. The basis of power is ultimately might, but might is not just a question of physical
superiority, it is also a question of being able to generate such, and here the appeal to
a common held authority is crucial. The authority of legitimacy, i.e. that of the law, in
particular the law of succession. It is based on a myth, but a surprisingly powerful one,
namely the myth of Royal Blood and progeniture. Given the dynastic ties this can in
principle be worked out, and adherence to its principles even to the point of tolerating the
inept, enables a transcendent idea to be universally accepted and implemented and prevent
continual warring, which in the long run will benefit no one. But of course at times, one
needs to modify those principles, and the way to modify them is not always agreed on.
The weakness of Henry VI clearly brought about such a crisis to its head.
Now in a factious country, there is usually no stable majority, so any course of action
requires alliances and hence compromises. The former are tactical and contingent upon
the unfolding of events and thus liable to be fluid and easily reversed. The raising of an
army is central, and this is a matter of costs, particularly irksome to a regent, whose taste
and need for it, easily outstrips that of his own private holdings. Thus he need to borrow
money from the weel-heeled, which carries with it bonds of dependency or extort it by
taxation, the ultimate authority being that of the parliament. Now a powerful king may
not oppose a united one, but easily seduce individual members thereof, and in that way
gain control. But basically each landowner owns people like cattle, people beholden to
him and who he can reward by the spoils of successful ventures. However, unlike the case
of the Hundred Years War on French soil, there was little ravaging during the war of the
Roses, no scorched-earth-tactics, no burning of villages and plunder, although of course as
always there were notable exceptions. In short, the people who suffered and died, apart
from the unlucky on the battle-field, were usually the main players of the game, either
honorably in the field, or through imprisonment and beheadings, sometimes followed by
further indemnities, so typical of that colorful age.
I have briefly outlined the course of events which lasted for some thirty odd years.
A fuller and more detailed survey would also include the main battles, in addition to the
concluding one of Bosworth, as well as the main characters of the story, in addition to
the kings. Some of those changed sides repeatedly, as the stakes were high and backing
the losing side at best meant ruin, at worst loss of life and neck. Kings are usually figure
heads, and this also goes for the various Dukes and Earls who play supporting roles,
but there is always the need for capable men, administrators, advisors, and those are
not seldom plucked from the stock of commoners, and thus not unseldom immune to the
power-struggles of the upper echelons, competence being always in demand.
In order to give some continuity to the story, the author has decided to focus on five
different personalities. One is the mother of the future Henry VII - Margaret Beaufort,
who was married off at an early age, and widowed repeatedly, producing just one off-
spring, whose education brought about a long separation from her. Unlike most women
at the time, she had power, and used it well. Then there is William Hastings, who rose
to the ranks, acquired a lot of power and influence, but was eventually betrayed by his
protector - Richard III, and executed. The Earl of Oxford, as one of those, whose military
exploits are noteworthy, before he comes to grief. More interestingly perhaps a certain
Dr Morton, a learned man who eventually becomes the Bishop of Ely, and finally Mrs
Shore, a woman of easy virtue, daughter to one of the wealthiest eldermen of London.
Most of those names appear in Shakespeare, tantalizingly also Mrs Shore, who does have
a historical basis, which the author has done his best in establishing and fleshing out. The
result is that instead of the narrative becoming a mere tedious catalog of events, a certain
fictional element is introduced, something no doubt scorned by the professional historian
but making the pill sweeter for the general reader.
The war lasting for over thirty years, but of course not continuously so, demands
quite a cast of characters, worthy of a long novel by a Tolstoy. Populations were smaller in
those days, and the ruling elite even far more so, than it would would be correspondingly
now, still a huge cast is required, hard to keep in your mind, let alone all those relations
holding between them, a task not eased by the fact that males are often referred to by
name and title, none of which has any bearing upon the other, and titles being carried
on by inheritance from one player to another, just as with the offices of kings. Thus as
the story unfolds one is being required to remember who is who, and who has just died
and no longer is listed under his old designation but replaced by somebody else. So there
are the various Dukes of Buckingham, Exeter, Norfolk, Somerset, Suffolk, as well as the
Earls of Essex, Lincoln, Northumberland, Oxford, Pembroke, Richmond, Rivers, Salisbury,
Warwick and Worcester. Add to that lords and viscounts and marquesses, to say nothing
about all the simple sirs and doctors. And you need continually to look up the register at
the end, especially the genealogical tables of the Lancasters and the Yorks, tables that are
crucial to the story.
Battles are important, and the reason why they are is not always obvious. Sometimes
they are decisive, sometimes not, and the reasons why are not intrinsic to what happens
on the field. The ultimate arbiter is physical might, although in practice the threat of its
invocation is enough. To win or to lose a battle is not the same thing as winning or losing
a war, and during the war of the Roses there were many battles lost and won on both
sides. To have an army is to show muscle, the muscle has not to be flexed. To engage
in battle is a way of calling bluffs, and an army shattered is a loss of prestige, which in
particular in a civil war is crucial, because it signals which way to hedge your bets. If
a country is overrun by an invading army, losing battles initially may not be so serious,
because the cause is common to all defenders, while in a civil strife, especially one such
as the one under consideration, allegiances, as noted, are fluid, and as with saddle points,
small vertical changes may give rise to large horizontal displacements.
The actual fighting of a battle is of course a dramatic affair, with a precise location
and of limited duration. Authors, and especially film-makers love to dwell on them. They
often provide detailed narratives complete with maps and arrows, and one wonders how
they are able to do so? A writer of a piece of fiction, or a director, may allow themselves
a certain license; while the serious historian ought to be more careful. The commander
of an army is given high prestige, as it is assumed that the success of an army, provided
it is roughly numerically equivalent with its opposing force, rises or falls in tandem with
the mastery of the commander. In practice, a commander has very little control of what
goes on, he may have some as to the actual positioning and time of attack, but once
the machinery is unleashed, it takes its own course. What results is chaos, especially as
soldiers mostly are amateurs and have had little drill (experience may count for some, but
then more in terms of psychology and endurance, than in actual tactical fighting). Armies
which were pre-programmed came later in the history of warfare. One notable thing about
battles of the past was the very active role played by the commanders, who did not shirk
from getting into the fray, although it stands to reason that they were protected by their
retinues. Typical is that so many of the leading figures of the strife died in battle, most
notably, as already noted, Richard III himself.
So which were the battles? The Duke of York starts a rebellion in 1452 and during the
insanity of Henry VI (and the birth of his son) is appointed protector, and hence effective
ruler. This is challenged and there is the first battle of St-Albans in 1455. An inconclusive
battle follows and in 1460 the Yorkist wins at Northampton, only to be defeated at Wake-
field a few months later. In that engagement the Duke of York is killed. But a few months
later there is a Yorkish victory at Mortimers Cross, followed by a Lancastrian victory at the
second battle at St-Albans. But by the overwhelming victory of The Yorkists at Towton
the son of the Duke of York is ensconced on the throne as Edward IV. There are ineffectual
attempts at rebellion by the Lancastrians but they are defeated more or less definitively
at Hexham in 1464 and the following year Henry VI is captured. But in 1469 the Yorkists
anyway suffers a defeat at Edgecote, Edward IV is temporarily in captivity. In 1471 there
are battles and Yorkist victories at Barnet and more significantly at Tewkesbury, where the
son of Henry VI succumbs. At the end of the year Henry VI is killed as well. The reign of
Edward IV is strengthened allowing him adventures such as invasions of France. Those see
little military actions, and are mostly waged in order to get strong negotiating positions
and secure from the French king a pension. The French King is, however, far superior
to the English in political and diplomatic astuteness. As a consequence the English reap
no territorial advantages. In 1483 Edward IV dies a natural death, his brother Richard
makes a succession of coups, getting rid of his nephews, the legitimate pretenders to the
throne, and makes himself king as Richard III. Two years later he is dead at Bosworth,
and Henry VII is able to successfully protect his reign from further attempts at rebellion.
By marrying the daughter of Edward IV, he unites the white roses (York) with the red
(Lancaster) and also confers some legitimacy to his own progeny. The subsequent reign of
Henry VIII in 1509 would not be understandable without a knowledge of the background
provided by the Civil War that brought the Tudors to the throne.
All of this is confusing. Like one Brownian motion, with one damned thing following
another. Battles may seem to settle matters, only to be overturned by future events, and
in the end everything blends into each other, and it takes a patient hand to disentangle
the surviving mess.
As general remarks one may point out that politics during such times were indeed
a very risky business. To lose all your property at least made it possible to recover, as
fortunes were as easily given as removed by the for the moment powerful. To lose your
head, on the other hand, was definitely more definitive, although it did not rule out the
rise of your progeny in the future. The key was always to have powerful friends, but of
course if you were king yourself, having to rely on even more powerful friends was a recipe
for disaster.
Furthermore there was a large variation of wealth. The richest landowners netting
incomes of the order of several thousand pounds, while commoners had less than a pound.
Thus a rich landowner could support a large number of people, and have even more people
dependent upon him, which was crucial as to raising men for local armies. The way to
display your wealth, even if it was not astronomical, was in your ways of dress, which
advertised money and power, especially among the commoners, who had no other ways of
displaying and maintaining distinction.